okay it's almost the last time that I
say you know it is the last official
lecture but of course we'll also have
one more lecture Tuesday which may or
may not be televised so make sure that
you come you don't want to miss that one
it's going to be the best one so far
okay come on
just you've been the best audience I
have to say first of all so I really
enjoyed teaching you but let's keep it
up one more time so today we will talk
about divergence theorem which is the
last in the series of results that we've
been studying for the last month or so
and finally today we'll be able to look
at all of these results in a kind of a
unified way and really appreciate the
sort of the strength and beauty of this
result okay so before I explain
divergence theorem I would like to one
more time to summarize and revisit the
stuff that we have learned after now
okay
and I want to do it by way of analogy
again so by the way some of the some
reading material is now available on
them on the class on a class homepage
about differential forms and general
Stokes theorem I will talk about some of
it today but if you want to read about
it in more detail you can find it here
this is something which will not be
required on the final exam this is a
this is something that I would like to
explain to you so that you can I think
will give you the opportunity to really
appreciate and to to see this material
the way mathematicians look at it and
the way sort of the right way the best
possible conceptual way okay now all the
formulas that we have studied so far
have the same general form of the same
general shape okay we are integrating
over some domains we are integrating
over some domains which I'll call Y for
now as a kind of a neutral neutral
notation which will then specialize in
various cases so we integrate over Y and
this Y is is embedded into a vector
space into the vector space RN where m
is one two or three because in this
course we only talk about three
dimension space plane in the line okay
but but the domain itself has its own
intrinsic dimension and that's something
which will denote by D so D can also be
one two or three but in any case D is
going to be less than or equal to n so
now I would like to summarize all the
formulas that we have learned as
depending on D and N
something with we've done before but I
want to do it one more time because
today we'll be able to to have a sort of
complete list of all of them okay so the
first case is when V is 1 and n is 1 in
this case the ambient space the ambient
space is just R which is the real line
and so our domain of integration is
going to be an interval on Angela on
this line or it should be always going
to be a union of several intervals but
if it is a union of intervals well the
integral will be just the sum over in of
the integrals over each of those
intervals so we might as well think that
it is a single interval so let's let me
draw it like this oh maybe it let me use
a different color for it let's say that
it is red and then it has two boundary
points which we'll call as before as a
and B so the domain Y is here that's the
interval and the boundary of this domain
consists of two points I'll call it V of
V of Y as before so it will just this
two points and actually this boundary
will be oriented oriented in the
following way we'll assign sine plus +
sign minus sign plus to this one sign
minus to this one because the interval
is actually oriented as well given their
intention of this line and so the
endpoint will have will come with + and
the and the initial point will come with
coefficient minor - one negative one and
the formula is the familiar formula from
one variable calculus the fundamental
theorem of calculus where on the Left we
take f prime of X DX and we integrate
over this interval from A to B well
usually we write just from A to B like
this but I would like to say that we are
integrating
over this interval so that all the
foremost look more similar to each other
and on the right-hand side we take the
difference between the values of F at
DNA so that's the simplest case that's
the simplest possible case
okay the next case which will be just
below it so in this leftmost column in
this leftmost column I will have the D
will be fixed and n will be growing okay
yes I'm looking at you and n will be
growing so here n is equal to 1 and here
n will be equal to 2 okay so here we are
talking about a curve which is embedded
in into a plane so again a picture which
is familiar by now so this is this is a
curve and this at the end point this
will be our Y and this will be the
boundary V of line and we'll denote them
by a and B capitalized because these are
not numbering numbers anymore but points
and also will have the signs as before
like this and the formula takes the
following shape it's the line integral
here of NAMBLA FDR over this curve let's
let's keep going well usually we call a
curve we call it's a curve we call it C
so let's just call it C and before and
then here will be F of B minus F away
that's the fundamental theorem for line
integrals it goes here in fact I can now
make a second and one more I could make
one more square down below in which D
would still be one but n would be three
the ambient space will be the
3-dimensional space
but actually the formula would look
exactly the same so there is no need I
might just as well put here an equal to
Z I will just have to copy the same copy
and paste the same picture just down
below and that takes care of the
leftmost column where the domain is one
dimensional one dimensional domain can
be in one dimension space in two
dimensional space or in three dimension
space but the four nodes for two
dimensional and three dimensional spaces
are identical exactly same so we just
keep the same picture okay now we move
to the next column and here we take D
equal to and if D is equal to 2 the
minimum value of M is also 2 we cannot
fit a 2 dimensional domain into line the
smallest space we can ambient space we
can have is r2 so M is equal to 4 so in
this case we are dealing with the
two-dimensional region on the plane
which has a boundary again a boundary
will be a drupe the boundary in yellow
and the domain in red so this is the
domain this is our Y which is something
which we normally call d the
two-dimensional region and we have the
boundary of this domain which is drawn
in in yellow okay so what happens in
this case in this case on the left on
the Left we have a double integral over
D of a certain expression and under on
the right we have a line integral of a
vector field which we write like this P
DX
Plus qg y so this is the line integral I
said the line integral of the vector
field p i+ QJ right but I would like to
write it like this to emphasize the
components P and Q because I'm going to
use them now on the left so on the Left
we have the strange-looking at first
anyway expression DQ DX minus DP dy da
and this is standard double integral
over this flat region a kind of double
integral that we studied more than a
months ago before the second exam okay
so clearly there is an analogy between
this tool right because here is the
simplest one simple region on the line
which has the same dimension which is
one with its boundary here is the
simplest region of the same dimension is
the ambient space on the plane namely -
and here we integrate on the left over
that region some expression which
involves derivatives of the object on
the right hand side MGM here as well so
next next we look at as an ad we raise
we raise the raise of dimension of the
ambient space from X n equal to 2 to n
equal to 3 so now our domain is
two-dimensional but it's embedded in the
three-dimensional space right so it's
there's much more variety of such
domains regions surfaces we call them
right and so this this region is going
to look like this but with one one
example we have we have studied this
upper hemisphere so let's let's stick
for that example so we have its boundary
will be some like this
and then Regent domain itself is like
this so this is why and we'll call it
with old Elm and education like a
membrane and this is a boundary right so
now on the Left we are integrating over
the boundary on the boundary of this of
this node of this region which would be
in this case a circle and we are taking
the line integral of a vector field so
it will be FDR and on the Left we have a
double integral over the surface itself
and last time we learned what should go
here well over the course of the last
three lectures I should say we learned
what should go here and what should go
here is is the surface integral over
another vector field which we call coral
this is coral F surface integral which
we do not like this
and this is what we call Stokes theorem
just like we call that greens theorem so
again I've drawn this picture before and
in fact this was this picture was three
lectures three or four lectures ago was
the motivation for our serve in our
search our quest for Stokes theorem
because we clearly have an analogy going
this way here is a one dimensional
curved object in the two dimensional
ambient space here is a two dimensional
curved object in a three dimensional
ambient space there is clearly likewise
analogy going this way from here to here
but there is also a vertical analogy
because they are all on the right column
in the right column we have two
dimensional objects in the left column
we have one dimensional objects right
but we're integrating over so so this
already covers four different cases or
actually to be more precise five
different cases because this should
actually be one more corner here one
more box here where n is equal to three
but I kind of seem to simplify the
picture combine them into what so five
different corners but the picture is not
yet complete because we have not yet
talked about what happens when D is
equal to 3 and V equal 3 is also
possible right so there is one box with
D equals 3 because if D is equal to 3
and has to be 3 because n has to be at
least D and we don't allow n to be
greater than 3 so the only possibility
is 3 and that's what we're going talk
about today the analog of those formulas
in the case when D is equal to 3 and
then actually n is equal to C so what
should this formula look like what
should be the general shape of this
formula well let's let's try to draw a
picture and I would like to so what I
need to do is I need to have a three
dimensional region I have to have a
three dimensional region and it will
have a two dimensional boundary so I
will draw it like this so the region
that I will draw will be a box will be a
box like this okay so the yellow yellow
should actual color in yellow not just
the edges of the box but also all the
sides of this box right so there are
there are six sides and should all be
covered in yellow so the boundary this
box the sides of the box let's say it's
a carton box so the cards on things will
be the boundary and the interior of the
box will be the object itself so the red
the red it kind of difficult starts it
starts motive it gets more difficult to
draw because now I also want to kind of
say that the interior is red but since
I'm drawing in the two-dimensional board
it looks confusing right so I'll kind of
do it like this so the Y will be less
could be the beef of the box and the
yellow will be the boundary so see it's
very important to separate what are we
talking about because sometimes when I
say it's here I know that some of you
are thinking about the surface of its
here and some of you could be thinking
about the interior of the sphere so we
have to separate those things you see
there is a sphere and there is interior
of the sphere also known as a ball one
is two-dimensional the other one is
three-dimensional likewise here the
inferior of this box is
three-dimensional and that will be our
domain that's why I wrote n equal three
but the boundary of this domain consists
of all of the six sides each side is
two-dimensional square may be a
rectangle and that and that's the part
of the boundary okay note that here is
different here the domain is the surface
of of this upper Hemisphere and so the
domain itself is already two-dimensional
so its boundaries one-dimensional that
should not be confused with this picture
okay so this is important point so
because now I mean I am in this case on
the left you will see on the left hand
side of the formula miss : I have a
double integral in both cases on the
left hand side of this formula in this
cone I have a single integral so on the
left hand side I integrate over the
domain which was a curve here and a
surfeit here and now I'm going to
integrate over this 3-dimensional ball a
box or ball well I could I could take a
ball instead of the box it's just more
difficult to draw and also I thought it
would be a little more confusing for you
because here's how upper Hemisphere if I
draw a ball it might look similar that's
why I kind of insisted on drawing it and
in this in this shape so on the left in
other words we should have a triple
integral over D of something of
something which should be related to
some sort of derivative of of the
integrand on the right hand side
but what should we take on the
right-hand side well first of all on the
right-hand side we should definitely
take we should definitely integrate over
the boundary which means in this case
actually going to be the sum of six
different integrals over over each of
those six phases six sides of this box
but what should we integrate well notice
one thing in all of these formulas on
the right-hand side we are integrating
an arbitrary object of a certain kind in
the last column
it's a function we are integrating a
function it's kind of silly to call this
an integral of a function but it is it's
an integral over zero dimensional region
consisting of these two points an
integral over of a function over a point
by definition is just the value of the
function at this point so the only thing
that we can sort of play with is the
orientation the sine plus and minus
but in any case it's like the integral
of a general function here the function
is general on the Left it's not general
it's a derivative of something from the
right like right here we look at the
line integral of a general vector field
general vector field whereas here we
have a derivative you have a question
so the question is about the boundary of
this of this box of this box right the
boundary consists of six sides of this
box so here is a piece of the boundary
here's one piece of the boundary and
there's another one piece of the
boundary and so on so let's think of six
carton what are squares rectangles
that's right
this is two-dimensional right this is
two-dimensional so okay maybe general
comment if you have a domain whose
dimension is D then the dimension of its
boundary is what what is it D minus one
that's right so when you take the
boundary the dimension with drove by one
this is general fact right you can
absorb it in all of these cases so here
the domain is three dimensional it's the
interior of the box and the boundary is
two-dimensional it consists of six sides
of the box but what I was saying earlier
is on the right hand side you should do
the most general integral or integral
the most general object that is allowed
here so to speak so here we're talking a
double integral all the over the
boundaries but we should integrate the
most general thing and the most general
thing that will integrate is a vector
field is a general vector field right so
in this new formula which we are
building now it is clear by analogy with
all the previous cases that what we
should put is the general vector field
and pick is surface integral I denoted
by E because I don't want to clash with
my patient on this call in this corner
but it is an object of the same kind
it's a vector field
so here E is a vector field
so E is going to be P will have three
components also PQRS or let's actually
let's also you know them in different
way let's say ABC vector field we have
learned how to integrate a general
vector field over general
two-dimensional surface in the three
dimension space right so let's do that
let's do that here however we will not
be integrating over general surface
we'll be integrating over the boundary
of something which appears in the left
hand side so the question now is what is
the derivative what kind of derivative
should be put here what kind of
derivative should we integrate here okay
that would be the analog of curl of that
expression of nabla F or F prime of X
you see so that's what we need to find
out and at for and I would so what I'm
going to do is that will give you the
answer I will give you the answer and
then I will explain in a more conceptual
way how all of these formulas come from
one and only formula from there's a
single formula which I kind of Barkley
explained last time there is a single
formula which by very basic and
elementary algorithm gives you each of
this six formulas that we have now on
the blackboard so the key to writing
this formula is we need to remember an
operation on vector fields which we call
divergence and this is something we
learn a couple weeks ago so that if you
have a vector field we have notion of
divergence over the set of field
which has the components again ABC and
this divergence is defining this by this
formula by this strange-looking formula
and that's what we should put here
that's just the way that is just what
happened its way for now when we take
diverges what either divergence E is the
vector field but what is divergence
divergence is a function it's not a
vector field right it's a function it
doesn't have three components like a
vector field it has only one component
it's just this component is the sum of
three functions because you have a
vector field so each of its components
is a function a B and C each of them is
a function right so you take the
derivative of Abe's like two eggs here's
another function here's another function
here is not a function take this sum it
is a function and we know how to
integrate functions over
three-dimensional regions we just call
it integral we put DV here it's a triple
integral it's a standard triple integral
so again something we learn before the
second exam we know that we know how to
integrate this see the difficulty with
Stokes formula was to properly formulate
Stokes formula we had to make sense of
this expression so we had to go over the
entire definition of surface integrals
we did not know what surface integrals
wore for general surfaces before we
encounter this formula right that's why
we spend two or three lectures studying
this surface integrals of different
kinds and what does it mean how to
compute them and so on now in a sense we
are in better shape because we actually
don't need to learn anymore technique
will read you know all the nested
formulism the new the new what could be
a new kind of integration is actually
old integration because we are
integrating just the function over
two-dimensional region
so that's the formula that is the third
formula that that completes now this
picture and this is called divergence
theorem okay so now now you kind of look
at this now you look at this and admire
it for a few seconds and I don't mean my
handwriting which is not bad but I mean
the actual content so there's clear the
clearly there is an analogy between all
of them but it looks if you look at it
all of them at the same time it looks
really strange why in one case you take
this weird expression which DQ DX minus
DP dy y in this case you take this weird
expression and I'm not even talking
about the curl which is like the worst
of all of them right so you have to ask
the question what does this all mean and
this is what when you you become a
mathematicians when you mathematician
when you ask this question this is how
you become a mathematician when you say
what does this all mean if there's some
reason for all of this what is it
can you express this in the marina is
there is the one formula which gives you
all of them in this special
circumstances and and the answer to this
is yes there is in fact one beautiful
formula which gives all of this in the
special cases and it's and we are almost
we almost know how to derive it when
almost nowhere all the ingredients
necessary to understand it I have
explained most of them but now I can
actually give you full disclosure okay
and demystify all of this formulas so
here here it goes
this is that general principle which I
have been promising you from the
beginning
the general principle I've been
promising you from the beginning looks
like this but up to now I was just
saying it in a kind of a figurative way
sort of the guiding principle and the
rough outline because I never explained
what kind of object is Omega is what is
G Omega what does it mean to integrate
over y over B of Y and so on also
technically speaking I should put
several integration signs on both sides
the number of integration sign should be
the dimension of Y here and number of
integration sign should be the dimension
of this one but I will ignore that issue
for now okay and so now finally we can
say what is what these objects are okay
and what these objects are this Omega is
what mathematicians call differential
forms warming is a differential form and
this D is an operation on differential
forms which I explained last time I
explained so in several examples on
differential forms
and so now what I want to do is I want
to explain one more time how you get all
of these formulas from this single one
I'm very simple Jo formula okay so the
way it works is like this let me start
in the case where in the left I will
explain it by example so I will start
with the leftmost colon in the leftmost
colon Omega so V equal 1 and so D minus
1 is 0 right we are integrating Omega
over the boundaries so the Omega should
be an object in that we want to
integrate over a D minus 1 D minus 1 G
minus 1 dimensional domain so in this
case Omega is just a function and in
this case this material separation D is
nothing mysterious it's just a
differential which we learned a long
time ago so that so what is it well
let's do different sub sub cases if n is
equal to 1 it means it's a function one
variable in this case the differential
is just f prime of X DX and that's
exactly what you put what you integrate
in the left upper corner right there f
prime of X DX right let me
let me show it this is exactly integral
of BF over this interval and this you
could think of as the integral over the
over the boundary of this interval so
this formula works out it is it does
indeed look like a special case of this
general principle right so we can we can
check this box the next case is when n
is equal to 2 or or let's do it both to
it and three in this case it's going to
be DF D X DX let's do it for let's do it
for n equal 2 just to simplify matters
it's going to be DF via partial
derivative SPECT 2x DX plus partial
derivative respect to Y dy and so we
will be integrating so here we will
integrating this here we'll be
integrating this but this is exactly
this is exactly the integral of nabla F
dot d R which we have in the formula for
G equal 1 and equal 2 right because what
is nabla F NAMBLA F is the vector field
which has components the respect to X
the roots is correct to Y and gr is also
a vector which has components VX and V Y
when I take line integral I take the dot
product when I take this line integral I
have to take the dot product between
this and this right what's the dot
product between this and this it's just
this expression which is nothing but the
differential of F so instead of writing
this instead of writing this we might as
well write integral
d/f so again in this case we can rewrite
a formula in a new way we can write it
as integral of DF is equal to integral
of f here over this curve which by the
way I should say that here we have a
servant ation and here we take it over
the boundary of again where this
integral is understood is just the
difference of the values are you with me
on this do you see what I mean as if
this formula gives you this ask me if
it's not clear okay so next so that's V
equal one so D equal one we have now
explained how to how to get from this
general principle by give making sense
of of the of the saturation D here D is
just differential the function okay so
let's now go back to two let's go to the
second : and let's look at this example
V equal to n equal to
[Applause]
so in this case the X minus 1 is 1 the
domain has dimension to the boundary has
dimension 1 and let's look at the case
when n is equal to 2 first that's the
case of greens theorem which is the
upper corner over there
in this case Omega is going to be the
following expression P DX plus Q dy
which is exactly what's written here pdx
plus qdy again you could think of this
as a line integral of the vector field
with components P and Q but actually
when I wrote this down I already wrote
it in a way which we need pdx plus qdy
so what is what is V Omega in this case
so this is something I already explained
in this case and now explain lab on
Tuesday explain how to calculate this
but let's do it one more time to
convince ourselves that this will give
us that result so by definition you you
apply this in the same way as you apply
to functions because this is a function
and this is DX so you just apply to this
function and then you multiply by DX so
by definition V Omega is DP DX plus DQ
dy let's write it in in a more detail
what is DP that's DP DX DX plus DP dy dy
and then we have DX you have to remember
let me open the brackets and multiply
them and I have to put dy here yes
so that's that's that that this this
term is given by the sum of this tool
but I have DQ DX DX plus DQ dy dy dy and
again let me open bracket multiply them
out so I get V 1 okay so that's the
woman but we have to remember the rules
and the rules are the first rule is that
if you have to be the same variable
twice get yep or dy dy this is just
plain zero for an obvious reason because
what this should represent but this kind
of expression should represent is an
elementary area and if you take the area
of a parallelogram where both sides you
know go along the x direction it means
the parallelogram has collapsed and its
area is 0 so that means that we have to
get rid of this and we have to get rid
of this which leave that with two terms
but there is a second rule the second
rule is DX
let's write it like this dy DX is equal
to negative of DX dy and I'll explain
now in more detail what this means we
already talked about this but ago I will
explain one more time if we do that you
see this comes with DX dy so we get DQ
DX times DX dy by this one comes with dy
DX and dy DX is negative of DX dy so
it's going to be minus DP dy
that's exactly the expression that we
get in Green's theorem right so I can
rewrite this formula as integral of G
Omega over D equals integral of Omega
over b LC well this is just what's
written here because omega by definition
is pdx plus qdy and I have just
explained that the Omega is this exist
so that's why it's the same formula okay
[Applause]
so I have also feed now this formula in
this general principle in the framework
of this general principle let me comment
now on this rule y dy DX is negative du
DX dy in fact the answer is best
understood this is best understood from
in the framework of our calculation last
time last time on Tuesday on Tuesday we
talked about this and we saw in a more
general context of Stokes theorem and we
saw that DX dy was by diffusion the
Jacobian of XY over UV v u gd-- so V of
XY for more general surfaces the meaning
of DX dy is just that it you
parameterize your surface so x and y
become functions of comic generic
parameters U and V and then by
definition DX dy is just this Jacobian
of this change of variables x vu DV but
Jacobian is something we learned
Jacobian is given by some simple formula
involving partial derivative
going to explore to recall what the
formula is what I need what I need to
recall is the fact that if you switch X
and y just by looking at the formula you
see right away that this is negative of
G of Y and over you right because the
Jacobian is given by a determinant of a
2 by 2 matrix when you switch X and y
you switch the columns of the rows
depending how you write it when you when
you do that you get a minus sign it's
just weight is the Jacobian has this
property that if you switch the two
variables you get a minus sign let's
just wait it okay and that's the reason
why since DX dy is this
so dy DX would be the same thing but
with this letter switch that's why I get
that V X V Y is negative dy DX so this
might look a little strange we are much
more used to formulas like a B equals B
a rather than a B equals negative of da
but in a sense this is just as natural
this kind of formulas just as natural
this is a rule for example with which we
can find in many instances like
multiplication of numbers we know that
if you multiply two numbers you get it
doesn't matter in which order you
multiply them you get the same answer
right so that's cool in we can say that
the product this product is symmetric or
commutative here it is slightly more
slightly more non-trivial example
suppose that a and B are vectors and we
are taking the dot product and we've
learned and it's obvious from the
formulas that the dot product in this
order is the same as the dot product in
this order so the dot product is
symmetric right the dot product is
symmetric but we've learned also another
operation on vectors namely the cross
product
and cross product for cross work is not
true that a cross B is equal to B cross
a instead a cross B is minus B cross a
so if you know what cross product is it
shouldn't come as a surprise that
sometimes operations that we do could be
anti symmetrical like this and in fact
the reason why we get a minus sign here
you can trace it all the way back to the
anti-symmetric probe and the
symmetricity property off of the cross
product because here we talk about
elementary areas and cross product has
to do with with such right cross product
as to do with areas the magnitude of the
cross product is the area so it's
actually very closely related this minus
sign is very closely related this minus
sign it is just an illusion that in
nature commutativity or symmetry
property like this appears more often
than this anti symmetry property in fact
physicists learned a long time ago that
amongst elementary particles you have
what's called bosons and fermions and
bosons are like obey the rule like the
dot product they commute but fermions
obey this rule fermions anti commute
remaining fields anti commute and
fermions are very important with you see
fermions you know experiments are all
over in place for an electron is a
fermion okay so so don't tell electron
that the way it behaves is unnatural
okay you love you love back at you you
know because if it were not like this
the atoms and the matter would not be
stable this is a very this property is
just as important as as the
commutativity property that we also
observe for bosons like photons for
example in fact there is a higher type
of symmetry which physicists study was
called and mathematician study which is
called supersymmetry and supersymmetry
is has to do with objects which are bebo
--the symmetry and anti symmetry
properties
like this so you might have heard about
the supercollider which just started you
know went back online like a week ago
which some people think is going to
create some antimatter and destroy the
world to which I'm sure some pieces say
I wish I mean that would be really cool
and it's not going to happen
but the question is what what can we
find and so one of the things which
people hope they'll find is
supersymmetry which is the kind of
higher type of symmetry mixing bosons
and fermions so and this when you
analyze mathematically the equations
which you know physicists would like to
have confirmed or disproved the kind of
formulas that you see are precisely
formulas like this this kind of
anti-competitive formula so this
formulas and I'm trying to say the disk
formats are built-in in the very
foundations of nature so it's very
natural and it really comes up that most
naturally when you study integrals when
you study integrals the rule is that we
the rule is that DF D Y is negative of
dy DX and this is the reason why in
Green's theorem you actually get this
minus sign DQ DX minus DP dy and not the
sum you see this is the reason we've
traced it back to the to this edge
contractivity property okay so now this
we've done this we have this confirms to
this general principle what about this
Stokes theorem these two and this I
explained last time so I'm not going to
do this calculation one more time but
let me just write it down for
[Applause]
for D equals four D equal to so we still
have D equal to 4y and divine V minus
one equal one foot but for the boundary
but now n is equal to three so we're in
the realm of Stokes theorem in this case
Omega will have an extra coefficient
which is will be VG X plus qdy plus rdz
and this integral could be written as
the integral of this Omega engine right
over D of M
okay for the same reason I already
explained it for double into four
integral in two-dimensional space F dot
d R is just
pdx plus qdy plus rdz the integral of
this is the same as f dot dr where f has
components P Q R this is just a simple
dot product that's what the dot product
gives you it gives you this formula what
about the Omega the Omega we calculated
last time remember is a long and
excruciating calculation but it gave us
precisely the curl right it gave us
precisely the curve so the Omega is
actually going to be precisely the curl
well the integral of the Omega double
integral G Omega is precisely the double
integral of curl last time this is we
did last this is what we did like I'm
not going to repeat it and so again this
formula Stokes formula is the special
case of the general principle okay any
questions so far and now we want to now
we want to cast this last formula this
divergence theorem also in the same way
so let's do that
well let me me right here
in the case of divergence theorem we
have V equal three so that the domain is
three dimensional and the boundary of
the domain is two dimensional right
so what could it be so the eds what does
this look like well in this case Omega
is going to look like this it's going to
be a times dy DZ plus b DZ DX plus c DX
dy and last time I explained that this
is precisely a dot d s last time where E
is vector field with components ABC in
other words you remember this definition
a dot DL is a thus integrals we you know
it's kind of a painful definition very
involved and we had to do it was a
complicated formula which include
included if ru cross RV but last time I
wrote I wrote out what are you cross RV
ears I explained it in great detail and
when we looked at what we got and we
used that formula for the Jacobian for
the use involving jacobians then we
actually ended up with this I remember I
remember I was writing it right here
okay just two days ago so this we did
which we explained so you see and now we
can actually appreciate this more if a
general a general of a general Omega is
going to be a combination of all
possible terms that you can write
involving this letters DX dy DZ except
well in this in this case we should only
have one of them at a pitch for each
summon only one why only one because we
are going to integrate here over the
of a two-dimensional domain so this had
to be we degrade that over one
dimensional boundary one dimensional
object and so the ad dy DZ should only
occur once each time what are the
possibilities well there is the X there
is dy and there is VZ and we are allowed
to multiply each of them by a function
that's how we get this expression D DX
plus qdy plus rdz there's nothing else
but now we are integrating we are
supposed to be integrating this over two
dimensional object over two dimensional
so we should have two of those we should
have DX what are the possibilities there
are nine of them there's like DF DX DX
dy DX DV there is dy DX dy dy you see
you ready there are nine possibilities
because you have three choices for the
first one teacher is for the second one
but in reality there are only three
choices not nine why because first of
all e.x.p.s doesn't make sense it well
it doesn't make sense it's just zero
this is zero DZ DZ is 0 so three are
gone there are six remaining but because
of this property anti-semitism is a
symmetry state property dy DX is the
same as negative of DX dy so we
shouldn't write it twice that's why we
only have DX dy here if we had dy DX we
will just put it with negative sign and
convert it into DX dy so that's why
those remaining six actually collapse to
3 divide is the DZ DX and DX dy ok so
this is the most general expression
which you can integrate over two
dimensional domain you can multiply each
of those three guides by a function and
that's and there you go that's what you
get and I claim that's actually the way
we set everything up integrating this
object is the same as doing a surface
integral of this vector field it's just
that we defined it as an integral of a
vector field because it made sense for
us because if you think about the flow
where e is actually the lost vector
field and the rate of flow is given by
such an integral rate of flow through a
membrane would be given by this integral
but we could have set it up in a more
abstract way by saying what could we
possibly be integrating and then you
would see that what you could possibly
be integrating is an expression like
this so there are different ways to
define double integrals but the result
you get is the same you either think
about it as the flux or surface integral
of a vector field with such components
or you simply say that this is an
integral of this quantity which is
understood in the same way as before for
example if you have this term let's talk
about this term now this term you just
write for DX dy you just write this
expression in other words you
parameterize your surface by actually
variables U and V and you write DX dy
like this okay so that's what goes here
this expression and now to understand
the left-hand side we need to take the
differential of this expression because
we always want to goes to the right
hands from the right-hand side to the
left-hand side we always take the
differential we already did it twice
we've talked about the leftmost colon
one where we took the differential
function that was the easiest one we did
it here where we took the differential
of this expression like this pdx plus
qdy was slightly more complicated but we
got the right answer also so let's see
how we can possibly get to did the
divergence and this will finally
demystify this last formula as well so
all we need to do is to apply the
differential to the sky okay let's do
that apply the differential to this guy
following the same rule as before
nothing more nothing less
what is the Omega it's going to be GA dy
DZ plus DB
DZ DX + DC DX dy okay good so what is da
da is the real suspect to add V X plus
derivative with respect to Y dy plus the
real suspect - Z DZ and then I put
bracket and I don't forget those guys
give Y D is that that clear that's or
not clear where it comes from
okay ask me if it's not clear this is
our last lecture so might as well well
not really last lecture it will be one
more okay but it's really it's really
simple I just take da that's da
multiplied by dy and DZ so let's open
the bracket and put this guy inside we
get this expression okay so this is a
good one you have the X dy DZ they're
all distinct we'll keep this but this
one has twice dy and we know that dy dy
0 there's nothing we can do about it it
is zero it's a lost cause ok it's gone
what about this one well this is
slightly more tricky
DZ dy DZ but the video y DZ first of all
we can switch dy and DZ by using the
rule then antisymmetry rule so this is
the same put a negative side DZ DZ dy
you see you switch these two guys so it
comes out as VZ dy and we put a minus
sign so it's the same but now we've got
DZ next to DZ that's again zero so this
is zero as well so out of these three
terms only one
survive and that's the a DF x DX dy DZ
let's now look at the second one in the
second one I will be taking derivatives
of B with respect to XY and Z but each
time I take the roof suspect 2x say I
spit out DX each time I take the result
vector Y I spit out dy and same for Z
about I already have DZ DX so I don't
want to spit out anymore disease or D
access so when I differentiate with
respect to Z or X I will get 0 for the
same reason for which this is 0 and this
is 0 that means the only non-trivial
term the only nonzero term I get out of
this guy it's when I differentiate with
respect to the variable which is not yet
here and there is only one such variable
Y right it's not a question it's a
statement so variable Y I already
explained why so I just say across when
I do its back to X is 0 with respect to
Y I'm going to get dy DZ DX this is what
I get from here when I differentiate
respect to Y I get this term times what
I already had that's how I get this and
and the last one will also disappear
because again there will be VZ twice
appear and and then we do the last one
for the last one the first two terms
will be blue disappear the only
non-trivial term which I'll get will
correspond to differentiating with
respect to variable that's not already
there which variable is not already
there its variable V so you have to
differentiate vectors D so you get b c
DZ DZ DX dy okay almost there
[Applause]
let me summarize let me summarize
the answer has three terms there is VA
px DX dy DZ
there is VB dy dy DZ DX and there is VC
DZ Z DX dy okay but now I have to follow
my rules and my rules tell me that dy DZ
DX first of all I can switch this two
guys I get a minus sign and then I
switch them again I get two minus signs
like two minus signs is a plus so I
actually I get back the expression DX dy
DZ without a sign because I had to jump
twice if I jump just only once over DZ I
get a minus sign but if I jump twice
there is no price to pay you see so well
you shouldn't generalize that last fatal
it applies when I when you when you
study fermions and differential forms so
actually this is the same as I could
just put the X in front which would be
the same expressions here and likewise
for this expression look you got DZ DX
dy you can you can jump the we can jump
over DX one negative sign and then over
dy second time no sign so again you get
back DC DZ with the usual product prty
DT so the end result is we just VA GS +
DV dy plus the
DZ DX dy DZ and that divergence of my
vector field e DV this is V V remember
which is exactly what I get in this
formula right so if somebody asks you
why do you get a minus sign here
and you get a lot of minus here but in
divergence theorem we don't get any
minus signs divergence is the sum the
roots back to X the respect to Y I did
escape to Z the sum now you can see you
can you can give a very clear answer
because when I calculate the derivative
the differential over of that expression
I need to jump twice over those things
and when we jump twice you get two minus
sign that's why there are no signs
showing up whereas when you apply the
differential this guy which has which is
the one form that has like this DX or dy
a single DX or a single dy and not not
two DX or DX dy or dy D D and so on then
actually you have to have to switch them
sometimes switch ones and that's what
gives you the sign so you see now all
these formulas which look really bizarre
if you just take them a space excites
value and don't try to see an underlying
pattern they now start to make sense
these signs are there for a reason and
you can say in a way that the reason is
that rule that anti anti anti symmetry
rule that's where the signs come from or
don't because sometimes you have to do
it twice and then the sign disappears
questions
okay yes
that's right so you're saying that we
also have this formula for the cross
product that a cross B is equal to
negative B cross a for the cross product
right right so the question is how
exactly you get this out of this right
so the point is the point is that when
we're actually doing the integral we
also in the setup of the integral we
also use that intuition so in fact it's
not just the area but its oriented area
in some sense and at the end that error
is just the cross product you see so
that's why when you switch you not you
get the same area but with a different
orientation right and that's the sign
the sign is not because the area is
always positive of course there is
positive but here we are talking not
just about the area but the area times a
normal vector and the normal vector can
point one way or the opposite way and
that's determined by the right-hand rule
or the corkscrew rule whichever you like
right and so if you switch then the
order you get a negative sign very good
very good I'm very glad that you asked
me this that's right so there is one
thing which I have not told you
right so the I gave you 99% of the truth
I made a ninety five percent right and
I'm glad that you asked me this so that
was exactly the question which
orientation should I take on the right
hand side so let's talk about
orientation
in all of the formulas orientation is
very important you can already see it
here we take F of B minus F of a and not
F of a minus F of B and that's because
we use this orientation on the left hand
side if we were using the object
orientation we would have to take F of a
minus F of D to get the right formula
right and then we talked a lot about
orientation last time for Stokes theorem
and also greens theorem is just a
special case of that so in fact to be
absolutely precise here I have to say I
have to draw the picture that I have to
choose eilean stations on both sides in
a compatible way compatible way means
that if I if I look at the terian tation
then what if I walk my head up on the
boundary variant ation along orientation
besides that as I walk with my head up
with respect to this orientation on the
surface the surface should be to my left
which means in this practice case if it
should go like this this is very
intention
only if I make compatible choice of
orientations do I get this formula and
not minus sign not left hand side equal
to right hand side up to sign but
likewise in this formula I should also
specify which orientation I choose so
let's talk about orientations in this
formula so here we have a left hand side
and a right hand side and on the left
everything is already oriented you see
this is why this formula appears in the
same row as those two formulas we never
talk about orientation here we never
talk about orientation here that's
because the regions in this case have
the same dimension as a dimension of the
ambient space here it's an interval on
the line here it's a pretty mental
region on the plane and here is a
3-dimensional box in the 3-dimensional
space these are what we call flat
regions they are not curved
let's contrast this region to this this
two-dimensional region to this upper
hemisphere upper hemisphere is curved
that is not curved when you talk about
the three-dimensional the
three-dimensional object you may think
that it is curved but that's the miss
misperception misunderstanding so the
point is not the boundary of it could be
curved
just like the boundary of this one is
curved I'm not saying the boundary is
not curved the boundaries curves fine
what I'm talking about
the region itself when I talk about the
region itself it means I take a point in
the interior I take a point in the
interior not on the boundary and I
observe that the small neighborhood of
this point is just a piece of this plane
it's not curved in any way right of
course on the boundary that's not the
case but I'm talking about the interior
I'm talking about this two-dimensional
region not about the boundary likewise
if I take a point in this box its small
neighborhood of this point is not a flat
in fact we cannot really imagine a
curved 3-dimensional object it would be
very difficult you see because a curved
3-dimensional object will have to live
in a four dimensional space just like a
curved two-dimensional object would have
to live in a in a three dimensional
space okay so since we are not going to
the four dimensional space all our
three-dimensional objects are flat and
for flat object there is a canonical
orientation let's this coordinate system
XYZ we know which coordinates first
which coordinates second which
coordinates third that that's Darien
tation or more precise you have fixed
the cyclic order of the update of the
coordinates so the left-hand side does
not require any additional information
that's just our you know familiar triple
integral when we talked about table
integrals we do not talk about
orientation because there is no need to
talk about the visitation they are
well-defined once we choose there once
we choose that in tation over three
dimensional space
but the double integral on the right
hand side requires orientation because
that's a surface integral and surface
integral depends on the choice of the of
the orientation of the normal vector in
this particular case for example giving
it Aryan tation giving the boundary
orientation would mean on each of the
sides to say the vector sticks out or
goes inside likewise on the bottom goes
down or goes inside likewise at the top
both so there are two choices
either they all stick out they all go
outward or they all go inside or inward
okay
so for for region which is the boundary
of a three dimensional domain there are
two possible orientations inward and
outward and we have to say which one we
should use here so as to have this
equality and not this is equal to
negative that I mean that two choices it
could be this or could be negative that
and and the correct statement of the
divergence theorem is that you have to
take this with outward orientation out
one night so now now everything is now
it is correct now it's 100 first give
you hundred percent the truth and we
have a little time to do a couple of
examples
so how can we use how can we use
divergence theorem we'll talk some we'll
talk some more about this general
pattern on Tuesday but now I just want
to give you a couple of examples just to
illustrate applications of this formula
how can we use divergence theorem well
basically in the same way in which we
use those formulas sometimes it's much
easier to calculate the left hand side
and the right hand side or the other way
around
usually it's usually this way not the
other way so for example suppose you
have a vector field which is X cubed I
plus y cubed J + eq k + b is the unit
ball well let's just say m is a unit
sphere and so you have to you're asked
to to calculate a double integral of e
dot DL over m ok so it's not it's not
impossible to do you have to
parameterize the sphere by using circle
coordinates and then you'll get some
formula but it is rather it's rather
complicated so actually in this case it
is worthwhile to apply this theorem in
fact the best example to illustrate this
would be I could choose the very I could
choose the vector field e for which the
divergence is equal to 0 into divergence
of electric field is equal to 0 it could
be some really bizarre vector field but
the divergence could be zero in other
words I could take a vector field
so this is a digression I could take a
vector field where here I would have
some function you know e to the tangent
of Z cosine Y I plus sine of cosine and
just imagine the most bizarre function
you can construct I guess my imagination
is not that it's not that wild but I'm
just trying to emphasize I'm just going
to give you some weird weird function
but you have to be careful you have to
make sure that the divergence is zero
something like this and suppose you you
get a problem like this so nobody in the
right mind will give you such a such a
vector field unless there was some
drastic simplification that could happen
right so in this practical case the
simplification is obvious if you take
the divergence the divergence takes the
derivative of the first guy with spec 2x
and you notice that this does not depend
on x at all so this will be zero the
derivative of this with respect to X is
zero derivative of this respect to Y is
zero the reach of this respect to Z is
zero so divergence is zero so usually so
if you look at a homework you might see
some really bizarre vector fields apply
divergence theorem we will not regret it
you might actually get zero and then
that's the end of the calculation right
because if it's zero that means this
integral is equal to this is equal to
zero what I'm giving you is not quite as
obvious sort of not quite as obvious a
gimmick but it's more real realistic
situation where the divergence is not
zero but it's very close it's very
simple because so what do I get in this
case in this case the divergence of e is
3x squared right that's what I get by
differentiating this plus 3y squared
that's what I get by differentiating
this respect to y plus VZ squared
so it's actually three times x squared
plus y squared plus Z squared and that
means that my integral my surface
integral can be written as the integral
over the interior of this of the sphere
over the unit ball so it's a triple
integral of the function which is 3x
squared plus y squared plus Z squared
but of course here I pass to the
spherical coordinates so this is
actually three rows square and I end up
with the following thing I get three
rows squared then I have to remember the
Jacobian Rho squared sine Phi and then I
have D Rho D Phi D theta which is very
easy to compute right so that's that's a
good illustration of how you could apply
divergence theorem we will talk about I
will give you more examples and talk
more about how to give you tips for the
exam problems on Tuesday and remember
the selection may not be televised so
you want to be here on Tuesday I want to
see all Tuesday okay
and thank you for being such a great
audience it's been a lot of fun
[Applause]